<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Oedipus Rex</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="oedipus-rex" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<p>Suppliants of all ages are seated round the altar at the palace doors, at their head a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest of Zeus</b>. To them enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My children, latest born to Cadmus old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why sit ye here as suppliants, in your hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Branches of olive filleted with wool?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What means this reek of incense everywhere,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And everywhere laments and litanies?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Children, it were not meet that I should learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From others, and am hither come, myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I Oedipus, your world-renownèd king.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ho! aged sire, whose venerable locks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Proclaim thee spokesman of this company,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Explain your mood and purport. Is it dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of ill that moves you or a boon ye crave?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My zeal in your behalf ye cannot doubt;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ruthless indeed were I and obdurate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If such petitioners as you I spurned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, Oedipus, my sovereign lord and king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou seest how both extremes of age besiege</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy palace altars⁠—fledglings hardly winged,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And greybeards bowed with years; priests, as am I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Zeus, and these the flower of our youth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Meanwhile, the common folk, with wreathèd boughs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Crowd our two market-places, or before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both shrines of Pallas congregate, or where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ismenus gives his oracles by fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, as thou seest thyself, our ship of State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sore buffeted, can no more lift her head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Foundered beneath a weltering surge of blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A blight is on our harvest in the ear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A blight upon the grazing flocks and herds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A blight on wives in travail; and withal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Armed with his blazing torch the God of Plague</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath swooped upon our city emptying</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The house of Cadmus, and the murky realm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Pluto is full fed with groans and tears.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Therefore, O King, here at thy hearth we sit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I and these children; not as deeming thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A new divinity, but the first of men;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First in the common accidents of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And first in visitations of the Gods.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou not he who coming to the town</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Cadmus freed us from the tax we paid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the fell songstress? Nor hadst thou received</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prompting from us or been by others schooled;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, by a god inspired (so all men deem,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And testify) didst thou renew our life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now, O Oedipus, our peerless king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All we thy votaries beseech thee, find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some succour, whether by a voice from heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whispered, or haply known by human wit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tried counsellors, methinks, are aptest found<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>To furnish for the future pregnant rede.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upraise, O chief of men, upraise our State!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look to thy laurels! for thy zeal of yore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our country’s saviour thou art justly hailed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O never may we thus record thy reign:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“He raised us up only to cast us down.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Uplift us, build our city on a rock.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy happy star ascendant brought us luck,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O let it not decline! If thou wouldst rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This land, as now thou reignest, better sure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rule a peopled than a desert realm.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor battlements nor galleys aught avail,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If men to man and guards to guard them fail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! my poor children, known, ah, known too well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The quest that brings you hither and your need.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye sicken all, well wot I, yet my pain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How great soever yours, outtops it all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your sorrow touches each man severally,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Him and none other, but I grieve at once</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both for the general and myself and you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore ye rouse no sluggard from day-dreams.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many, my children, are the tears I’ve wept,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And threaded many a maze of weary thought.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus pondering one clue of hope I caught,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tracked it up; I have sent Menoeceus’ son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creon, my consort’s brother, to inquire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Pythian Phoebus at his Delphic shrine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How I might save the State by act or word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now I reckon up the tale of days</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since he set forth, and marvel how he fares.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis strange, this endless tarrying, passing strange.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when he comes, then I were base indeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I perform not all the god declares.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy words are well timed; even as thou speakest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shouting tells me Creon is at hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O King Apollo! may his joyous looks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be presage of the joyous news he brings!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As I surmise, ’tis welcome; else his head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had scarce been crowned with berry-laden bays.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We soon shall know; he’s now in earshot range.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My royal cousin, say, Menoeceus’ child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What message hast thou brought us from the god?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good news, for e’en intolerable ills,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Finding right issue, tend to naught but good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How runs the oracle? thus far thy words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give me no ground for confidence or fear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou wouldst hear my message publicly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll tell thee straight, or with thee pass within.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak before all; the burden that I bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is more for these my subjects than myself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me report then all the god declared.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>King Phoebus bids us straitly extirpate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A fell pollution that infests the land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no more harbour an inveterate sore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What expiation means he? What’s amiss?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Banishment, or the shedding blood for blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This stain of blood makes shipwreck of our state.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whom can he mean, the miscreant thus denounced?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Before thou didst assume the helm of State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sovereign of this land was Laius.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I heard as much, but never saw the man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He fell; and now the god’s command is plain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Punish his takers-off, whoe’er they be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where are they? Where in the wide world to find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The far, faint traces of a bygone crime?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In this land, said the god; “who seeks shall find;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who sits with folded hands or sleeps is blind.”</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Was he within his palace, or afield,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or traveling, when Laius met his fate?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Abroad; he started, so he told us, bound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Delphi, but he never thence returned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Came there no news, no fellow-traveller</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give some clue that might be followed up?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But one escaped, who flying for dear life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could tell of all he saw but one thing sure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what was that? One clue might lead us far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With but a spark of hope to guide our quest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Robbers, he told us, not one bandit but</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A troop of knaves, attacked and murdered him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did any bandit dare so bold a stroke,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless indeed he were suborned from Thebes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So ’twas surmised, but none was found to avenge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His murder mid the trouble that ensued.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What trouble can have hindered a full quest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When royalty had fallen thus miserably?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The riddling Sphinx compelled us to let slide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dim past and attend to instant needs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, <em>I</em> will start afresh and once again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make dark things clear. Right worthy the concern</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Phoebus, worthy thine too, for the dead;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I also, as is meet, will lend my aid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To avenge this wrong to Thebes and to the god.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not for some far-off kinsman, but myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall I expel this poison in the blood;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For whoso slew that king might have a mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To strike me too with his assassin hand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore in righting him I serve myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up, children, haste ye, quit these altar stairs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take hence your suppliant wands, go summon hither</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Theban commons. With the god’s good help</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Success is sure; ’tis ruin if we fail. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, children, let us hence; these gracious words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forestall the very purpose of our suit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And may the god who sent this oracle</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save us withal and rid us of this pest. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Priest</b> and Suppliants.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Sweet-voiced daughter of Zeus from thy gold-paved Pythian shrine</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Wafted to Thebes divine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What dost thou bring me? My soul is racked and shivers with fear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">(Healer of Delos, hear!)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou some pain unknown before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with the circling years renewest a penance of yore?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Offspring of golden Hope, thou voice immortal, O tell me.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>First on Athenè I call; O Zeus-born goddess, defend!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Goddess and sister, befriend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Artemis, Lady of Thebes, high-throned in the midst of our mart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Lord of the death-winged dart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Your threefold aid I crave</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">From death and ruin our city to save.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If in the days of old when we nigh had perished, ye drave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From our land the fiery plague, be near us now and defend us!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">Ah me, what countless woes are mine!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">All our host is in decline;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Weaponless my spirit lies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Earth her gracious fruits denies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Women wail in barren throes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Life on life downstriken goes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Swifter than the wind bird’s flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Swifter than the Fire-God’s might,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">To the westering shores of Night.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">Wasted thus by death on death</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">All our city perisheth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Corpses spread infection round;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">None to tend or mourn is found.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Wailing on the altar stair</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Wives and grandams rend the air⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Long-drawn moans and piercing cries</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Blent with prayers and litanies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Golden child of Zeus, O hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Let thine angel face appear!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>And grant that Ares whose hot breath I feel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Though without targe or steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He stalks, whose voice is as the battle shout,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">May turn in sudden rout,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the unharboured Thracian waters sped,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Or Amphitrite’s bed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">For what night leaves undone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Smit by the morrow’s sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perisheth. Father Zeus, whose hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth wield the lightning brand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Slay him beneath thy levin bold, we pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Slay him, O slay!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>O that thine arrows too, Lycean King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">From that taut bow’s gold string,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might fly abroad, the champions of our rights;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Yea, and the flashing lights</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Artemis, wherewith the huntress sweeps</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Across the Lycian steeps.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee too I call with golden-snooded hair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Whose name our land doth bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bacchus to whom thy Maenads Evoē shout;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Come with thy bright torch, rout,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Blithe god whom we adore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">The god whom gods abhor.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye pray; ’tis well, but would ye hear my words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And heed them and apply the remedy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye might perchance find comfort and relief.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind you, I speak as one who comes a stranger</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To this report, no less than to the crime;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For how unaided could I track it far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a clue? Which lacking (for too late</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was I enrolled a citizen of Thebes)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This proclamation I address to all:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thebans, if any knows the man by whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laius, son of Labdacus, was slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I summon him to make clean shrift to me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if he shrinks, let him reflect that thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confessing he shall ’scape the capital charge;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the worst penalty that shall befall him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is banishment⁠—unscathed he shall depart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if an alien from a foreign land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be known to any as the murderer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let him who knows speak out, and he shall have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Due recompense from me and thanks to boot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if ye still keep silence, if through fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For self or friends ye disregard my hest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear what I then resolve: I lay my ban</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the assassin whosoe’er he be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let no man in this land, whereof I hold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sovereign rule, harbour or speak to him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give him no part in prayer or sacrifice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or lustral rites, but hound him from your homes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For this is our defilement, so the god</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath lately shown to me by oracles.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus as their champion I maintain the cause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both of the god and of the murdered King.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And on the murderer this curse I lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(On him and all the partners in his guilt):⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wretch, may he pine in utter wretchedness!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for myself, if with my privity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He gain admittance to my hearth, I pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The curse I laid on others fall on me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See that ye give effect to all my hest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For my sake and the god’s and for our land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A desert blasted by the wrath of heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, let alone the god’s express command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It were a scandal ye should leave unpurged</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The murder of a great man and your king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor track it home. And now that I am lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Successor to his throne, his bed, his wife,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(And had he not been frustrate in the hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of issue, common children of one womb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had forced a closer bond twixt him and me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Fate swooped down upon him), therefore I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His blood-avenger will maintain his cause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though he were my sire, and leave no stone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unturned to track the assassin or avenge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The son of Labdacus, of Polydore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Cadmus, and Agenor first of the race.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for the disobedient thus I pray:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May the gods send them neither timely fruits</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of earth, nor teeming increase of the womb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But may they waste and pine, as now they waste,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye and worse stricken; but to all of you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My loyal subjects who approve my acts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May Justice, our ally, and all the gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be gracious and attend you evermore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The oath thou profferest, sire, I take and swear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I slew him not myself, nor can I name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The slayer. For the quest, ’twere well, methinks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Phoebus, who proposed the riddle, himself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should give the answer⁠—who the murderer was.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well argued; but no living man can hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To force the gods to speak against their will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May I then say what seems next best to me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, if there be a third best, tell it too.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My liege, if any man sees eye to eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With our lord Phoebus, ’tis our prophet, lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Teiresias; he of all men best might guide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A searcher of this matter to the light.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here too my zeal has nothing lagged, for twice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At Creon’s instance have I sent to fetch him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And long I marvel why he is not here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I mind me too of rumors long ago⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mere gossip.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell them, I would fain know all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas said he fell by travellers.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So I heard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But none has seen the man who saw him fall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if he knows what fear is, he will quail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And flee before the terror of thy curse.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Words scare not him who blenches not at deeds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But here is one to arraign him. Lo, at length</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They bring the god-inspirèd seer in whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above all other men is truth inborn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</b>, led by a boy.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Teiresias, seer who comprehendest all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lore of the wise and hidden mysteries,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High things of heaven and low things of the earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou knowest, though thy blinded eyes see naught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What plague infects our city; and we turn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee, O seer, our one defense and shield.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The purport of the answer that the God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Returned to us who sought his oracle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The messengers have doubtless told thee⁠—how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One course alone could rid us of the pest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To find the murderers of Laius,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And slay them or expel them from the land.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore begrudging neither augury</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor other divination that is thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O save thyself, thy country, and thy king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save all from this defilement of blood shed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On thee we rest. This is man’s highest end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To others’ service all his powers to lend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, alas, what misery to be wise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When wisdom profits nothing! This old lore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had forgotten; else I were not here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What ails thee? Why this melancholy mood?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me go home; prevent me not; ’twere best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou shouldst bear thy burden and I mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For shame! no true-born Theban patriot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would thus withhold the word of prophecy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span><em>Thy</em> words, O king, are wide of the mark, and I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fear lest I too trip like thee⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh speak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Withhold not, I adjure thee, if thou know’st,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy knowledge. We are all thy suppliants.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, for ye all are witless, but my voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will ne’er reveal my miseries⁠—or thine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What then, thou knowest, and yet willst not speak!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wouldst thou betray us and destroy the State?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will not vex myself nor thee. Why ask</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus idly what from me thou shalt not learn?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Monster! thy silence would incense a flint.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will nothing loose thy tongue? Can nothing melt thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or shake thy dogged taciturnity?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou blam’st my mood and seest not thine own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith thou art mated; no, thou taxest me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And who could stay his choler when he heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How insolently thou dost flout the State?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, it will come what will, though I be mute.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since come it must, thy duty is to tell me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have no more to say; storm as thou willst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And give the rein to all thy pent-up rage.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, I am wroth, and will not stint my words,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But speak my whole mind. Thou methinks thou art he,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who planned the crime, aye, and performed it too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All save the assassination; and if thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hadst not been blind, I had been sworn to boot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou alone didst do the bloody deed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is it so? Then I charge thee to abide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By thine own proclamation; from this day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speak not to these or me. Thou art the man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou the accursed polluter of this land.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Vile slanderer, thou blurtest forth these taunts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And think’st forsooth as seer to go scot free.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, I am free, strong in the strength of truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who was thy teacher? not methinks thy art.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou, goading me against my will to speak.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What speech? repeat it and resolve my doubt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Didst miss my sense wouldst thou goad me on?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I but half caught thy meaning; say it again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say thou art the murderer of the man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose murderer thou pursuest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou shalt rue it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Twice to repeat so gross a calumny.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Must I say more to aggravate thy rage?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say all thou wilt; it will be but waste of breath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say thou livest with thy nearest kin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In infamy, unwitting in thy shame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Think’st thou for aye unscathed to wag thy tongue?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, if the might of truth can aught prevail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With other men, but not with thee, for thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In ear, wit, eye, in everything art blind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Poor fool to utter gibes at me which all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here present will cast back on thee ere long.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Offspring of endless Night, thou hast no power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er me or any man who sees the sun.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, for thy weird is not to fall by me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I leave to Apollo what concerns the god.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is this a plot of Creon, or thine own?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not Creon, thou thyself art thine own bane.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O wealth and empiry and skill by skill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Outwitted in the battlefield of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What spite and envy follow in your train!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See, for this crown the State conferred on me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A gift, a thing I sought not, for this crown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The trusty Creon, my familiar friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath lain in wait to oust me and suborned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This mountebank, this juggling charlatan,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This tricksy beggar-priest, for gain alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Keen-eyed, but in his proper art stone-blind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say, sirrah, hast thou ever proved thyself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A prophet? When the riddling Sphinx was here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why hadst thou no deliverance for this folk?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet the riddle was not to be solved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By guess-work but required the prophet’s art;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherein thou wast found lacking; neither birds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor sign from heaven helped thee, but <em>I</em> came,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The simple Oedipus; <em>I</em> stopped her mouth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By mother wit, untaught of auguries.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is the man whom thou wouldst undermine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In hope to reign with Creon in my stead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methinks that thou and thine abettor soon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will rue your plot to drive the scapegoat out.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thank thy grey hairs that thou hast still to learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What chastisement such arrogance deserves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To us it seems that both the seer and thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Oedipus, have spoken angry words.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is no time to wrangle but consult</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How best we may fulfil the oracle.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>King as thou art, free speech at least is mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make reply; in this I am thy peer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I own no lord but Loxias; him I serve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ne’er can stand enrolled as Creon’s man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus then I answer: since thou hast not spared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To twit me with my blindness⁠—thou hast eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet see’st not in what misery thou art fallen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor where thou dwellest nor with whom for mate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dost know thy lineage? Nay, thou know’st it not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all unwitting art a double foe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thine own kin, the living and the dead;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye and the dogging curse of mother and sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One day shall drive thee, like a two-edged sword,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond our borders, and the eyes that now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See clear shall henceforward endless night.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah whither shall thy bitter cry not reach,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What crag in all Cithaeron but shall then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reverberate thy wail, when thou hast found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With what a hymeneal thou wast borne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Home, but to no fair haven, on the gale!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye, and a flood of ills thou guessest not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall set thyself and children in one line.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flout then both Creon and my words, for none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mortals shall be striken worse than thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Must I endure this fellow’s insolence?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A murrain on thee! Get thee hence! Begone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Avaunt! and never cross my threshold more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I ne’er had come hadst thou not bidden me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew not thou wouldst utter folly, else</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long hadst thou waited to be summoned here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Such am I⁠—as it seems to thee a fool,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But to the parents who begat thee, wise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What sayest thou⁠—“parents”? Who begat me, speak?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This day shall be thy birth-day, and thy grave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou lov’st to speak in riddles and dark words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In reading riddles who so skilled as thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Twit me with that wherein my greatness lies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet this very greatness proved thy bane.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No matter if I saved the commonwealth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis time I left thee. Come, boy, take me home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, take him quickly, for his presence irks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lets me; gone, thou canst not plague me more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go, but first will tell thee why I came.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy frown I dread not, for thou canst not harm me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear then: this man whom thou hast sought to arrest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With threats and warrants this long while, the wretch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who murdered Laius⁠—that man is here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He passes for an alien in the land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But soon shall prove a Theban, native born.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet his fortune brings him little joy;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For blind of seeing, clad in beggar’s weeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For purple robes, and leaning on his staff,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To a strange land he soon shall grope his way.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of the children, inmates of his home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He shall be proved the brother and the sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of her who bare him son and husband both,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Co-partner, and assassin of his sire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go in and ponder this, and if thou find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I have missed the mark, henceforth declare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have no wit nor skill in prophecy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Who is he by voice immortal named from Pythia’s rocky cell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doer of foul deeds of bloodshed, horrors that no tongue can tell?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">A foot for flight he needs</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Fleeter than storm-swift steeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">For on his heels doth follow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Armed with the lightnings of his Sire, Apollo.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Like sleuth-hounds too</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The Fates pursue.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Yea, but now flashed forth the summons from Parnassus’ snowy peak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Near and far the undiscovered doer of this murder seek!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Now like a sullen bull he roves</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Through forest brakes and upland groves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And vainly seeks to fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The doom that ever nigh</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Flits o’er his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still by the avenging Phoebus sped,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The voice divine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">From Earth’s mid shrine.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Sore perplexèd am I by the words of the master seer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are they true, are they false? I know not and bridle my tongue for fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fluttered with vague surmise; nor present nor future is clear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quarrel of ancient date or in days still near know I none</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twixt the Labdacidan house and our ruler, Polybus’ son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proof is there none: how then can I challenge our King’s good name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How in a blood-feud join for an untracked deed of shame?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>All wise are Zeus and Apollo, and nothing is hid from their ken;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They are gods; and in wits a man may surpass his fellow men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that a mortal seer knows more than I know⁠—where</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath this been proven? Or how without sign assured, can I blame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him who saved our State when the wingèd songstress came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tested and tried in the light of us all, like gold assayed?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How can I now assent when a crime is on Oedipus laid?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Friends, countrymen, I learn King Oedipus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath laid against me a most grievous charge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And come to you protesting. If he deems</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I have harmed or injured him in aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By word or deed in this our present trouble,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I care not to prolong the span of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus ill-reputed; for the calumny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hits not a single blot, but blasts my name,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If by the general voice I am denounced</span>
								<br/>
								<span>False to the State and false by you my friends.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>This taunt, it well may be, was blurted out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In petulance, not spoken advisedly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did any dare pretend that it was I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prompted the seer to utter a forged charge?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Such things were said; with what intent I know not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Were not his wits and vision all astray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When upon me he fixed this monstrous charge?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I know not; to my sovereign’s acts I am blind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But lo, he comes to answer for himself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sirrah, what mak’st thou here? Dost thou presume</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To approach my doors, thou brazen-facèd rogue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My murderer and the filcher of my crown?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, answer this, didst thou detect in me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some touch of cowardice or witlessness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That made thee undertake this enterprise?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I seemed forsooth too simple to perceive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The serpent stealing on me in the dark,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or else too weak to scotch it when I saw.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This <em>thou</em> art witless seeking to possess</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a following or friends the crown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A prize that followers and wealth must win.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Attend me. Thou hast spoken, ’tis my turn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make reply. Then having heard me, judge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art glib of tongue, but I am slow to learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thee; I know too well thy venomous hate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>First I would argue out this very point.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O argue not that thou art not a rogue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou dost count a virtue stubbornness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unschooled by reason, thou art much astray.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou dost hold a kinsman may be wronged,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no pains follow, thou art much to seek.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Therein thou judgest rightly, but this wrong</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou allegest⁠—tell me what it is.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Didst thou or didst thou not advise that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should call the priest?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, and I stand to it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell me how long is it since Laius⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since Laius⁠ ⁠… ? I follow not thy drift.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By violent hands was spirited away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In the dim past, a many years agone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did the same prophet then pursue his craft?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, skilled as now and in no less repute.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did he at that time ever glance at me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not to my knowledge, not when I was by.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But was no search and inquisition made?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely full quest was made, but nothing learnt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why failed the seer to tell his story <em>then</em>?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not, and not knowing hold my tongue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This much thou knowest and canst surely tell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What’s mean’st thou? All I know I will declare.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But for thy prompting never had the seer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ascribed to me the death of Laius.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If so he thou knowest best; but I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would put thee to the question in my turn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Question and prove me murderer if thou canst.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then let me ask thee, didst thou wed my sister?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A fact so plain I cannot well deny.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And as thy consort queen she shares the throne?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I grant her freely all her heart desires.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And with you twain I share the triple rule?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, and it is that proves thee a false friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so, if thou wouldst reason with thyself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I with myself. First, I bid thee think,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would any mortal choose a troubled reign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of terrors rather than secure repose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If the same power were given him? As for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have no natural craving for the name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of king, preferring to do kingly deeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so thinks every sober-minded man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now all my needs are satisfied through thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have naught to fear; but were I king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My acts would oft run counter to my will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How could a title then have charms for me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above the sweets of boundless influence?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not so infatuate as to grasp</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadow when I hold the substance fast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now all men cry me Godspeed! wish me well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every suitor seeks to gain my ear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If he would hope to win a grace from thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should I leave the better, choose the worse?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That were sheer madness, and I am not mad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No such ambition ever tempted me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor would I have a share in such intrigue.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if thou doubt me, first to Delphi go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There ascertain if my report was true</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the god’s answer; next investigate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If with the seer I plotted or conspired,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if it prove so, sentence me to death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not by thy voice alone, but mine and thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But O condemn me not, without appeal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On bare suspicion. ’Tis not right to adjudge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bad men at random good, or good men bad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would as lief a man should cast away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The thing he counts most precious, his own life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As spurn a true friend. Thou wilt learn in time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The truth, for time alone reveals the just;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A villain is detected in a day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>To one who walketh warily his words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Commend themselves; swift counsels are not sure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When with swift strides the stealthy plotter stalks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must be quick too with my counterplot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wait his onset passively, for him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is sure success, for me assured defeat.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What then’s thy will? To banish me the land?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I would not have thee banished, no, but dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That men may mark the wages envy reaps.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I see thou wilt not yield, nor credit me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>[None but a fool would credit such as thou.]<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art not wise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wise for myself at least.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why not for me too?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why for such a knave?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Suppose thou lackest sense.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet kings must rule.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not if they rule ill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh my Thebans, hear him!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy Thebans? am not I a Theban too?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Cease, princes; lo there comes, and none too soon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Jocasta from the palace. Who so fit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As peacemaker to reconcile your feud?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Misguided princes, why have ye upraised</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This wordy wrangle? Are ye not ashamed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While the whole land lies striken, thus to voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your private injuries? Go in, my lord;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go home, my brother, and forebear to make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A public scandal of a petty grief.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My royal sister, Oedipus, thy lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath bid me choose (O dread alternative!)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An outlaw’s exile or a felon’s death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, lady; I have caught him practising</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against my royal person his vile arts.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May I ne’er speed but die accursed, if I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In any way am guilty of this charge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Believe him, I adjure thee, Oedipus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First for his solemn oath’s sake, then for mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for thine elders’ sake who wait on thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Hearken, King, reflect, we pray thee, but not stubborn but relent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say to what should I consent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Respect a man whose probity and troth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are known to all and now confirmed by oath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost know what grace thou cravest?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, I know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Declare it then and make thy meaning plain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Brand not a friend whom babbling tongues assail;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let not suspicion ’gainst his oath prevail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bethink you that in seeking this ye seek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In very sooth my death or banishment?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<p>
									<span>No, by the leader of the host divine!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Witness, thou Sun, such thought was never mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unblest, unfriended may I perish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever I such wish did cherish!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But O my heart is desolate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Musing on our striken State,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doubly fall’n should discord grow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twixt you twain, to crown our woe.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, let him go, no matter what it cost me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or certain death or shameful banishment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For your sake I relent, not his; and him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where’er he be, my heart shall still abhor.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art as sullen in thy yielding mood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As in thine anger thou wast truculent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such tempers justly plague themselves the most.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Leave me in peace and get thee gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By thee misjudged, but justified by these. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Lady, lead indoors thy consort; wherefore longer here delay?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell me first how rose the fray.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Rumours bred unjust suspicions and injustice rankles sore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Were both at fault then?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Both.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What was the tale?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ask me no more. The land is sore distressed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twere better sleeping ills to leave at rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Strange counsel, friend! I know thou mean’st me well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet would’st mitigate and blunt my zeal.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>King, I say it once again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Witless were I proved, insane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I lightly put away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee my country’s prop and stay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pilot who, in danger sought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To a quiet haven brought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our distracted State; and now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who can guide us right but thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me too, I adjure thee, know, O king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What cause has stirred this unrelenting wrath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will, for thou art more to me than these.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lady, the cause is Creon and his plots.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But what provoked the quarrel? make this clear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He points me out as Laius’ murderer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Of his own knowledge or upon report?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He is too cunning to commit himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And makes a mouthpiece of a knavish seer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then thou mayest ease thy conscience on that score.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Listen and I’ll convince thee that no man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath scot or lot in the prophetic art.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here is the proof in brief. An oracle</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once came to Laius (I will not say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas from the Delphic god himself, but from</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His ministers) declaring he was doomed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To perish by the hand of his own son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A child that should be born to him by me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now Laius⁠—so at least report affirmed⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was murdered on a day by highwaymen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No natives, at a spot where three roads meet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As for the child, it was but three days old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Laius, its ankles pierced and pinned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Together, gave it to be cast away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By others on the trackless mountain side.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So then Apollo brought it not to pass</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The child should be his father’s murderer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the dread terror find accomplishment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Laius be slain by his own son.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such was the prophet’s horoscope. O king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Regard it not. Whate’er the god deems fit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To search, himself unaided will reveal.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What memories, what wild tumult of the soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came o’er me, lady, as I heard thee speak!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What mean’st thou? What has shocked and startled thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Methought I heard thee say that Laius</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was murdered at the meeting of three roads.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So ran the story that is current still.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where did this happen? Dost thou know the place?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Phocis the land is called; the spot is where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Branch roads from Delphi and from Daulis meet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And how long is it since these things befell?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas but a brief while were thou wast proclaimed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our country’s ruler that the news was brought.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Zeus, what hast thou willed to do with me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is it, Oedipus, that moves thee so?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ask me not yet; tell me the build and height</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Laius? Was he still in manhood’s prime?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tall was he, and his hair was lightly strewn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With silver; and not unlike thee in form.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O woe is me! Mehtinks unwittingly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I laid but now a dread curse on myself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say’st thou? When I look upon thee, my king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tremble.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis a dread presentiment</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That in the end the seer will prove not blind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One further question to resolve my doubt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I quail; but ask, and I will answer all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Had he but few attendants or a train</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of armed retainers with him, like a prince?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They were but five in all, and one of them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A herald; Laius in a mule-car rode.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! ’tis clear as noonday now. But say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lady, who carried this report to Thebes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A serf, the sole survivor who returned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Haply he is at hand or in the house?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, for as soon as he returned and found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee reigning in the stead of Laius slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He clasped my hand and supplicated me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To send him to the alps and pastures, where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He might be farthest from the sight of Thebes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so I sent him. ’Twas an honest slave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And well deserved some better recompense.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fetch him at once. I fain would see the man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He shall be brought; but wherefore summon him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lady, I fear my tongue has overrun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Discretion; therefore I would question him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, he shall come, but may not I too claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To share the burden of thy heart, my king?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thou shalt not be frustrate of thy wish,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now my imaginings have gone so far.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who has a higher claim that thou to hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My tale of dire adventures? Listen then.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My sire was Polybus of Corinth, and</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My mother Merope, a Dorian;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I was held the foremost citizen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till a strange thing befell me, strange indeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet scarce deserving all the heat it stirred.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A roisterer at some banquet, flown with wine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shouted “Thou art not true son of thy sire.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It irked me, but I stomached for the nonce</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The insult; on the morrow I sought out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My mother and my sire and questioned them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They were indignant at the random slur</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cast on my parentage and did their best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To comfort me, but still the venomed barb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rankled, for still the scandal spread and grew.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So privily without their leave I went</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Delphi, and Apollo sent me back</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Baulked of the knowledge that I came to seek.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But other grievous things he prophesied,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woes, lamentations, mourning, portents dire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wit I should defile my mother’s bed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And raise up seed too loathsome to behold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And slay the father from whose loins I sprang.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Warned by the oracle I turned and fled⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Corinth henceforth was to me unknown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save as I knew its region by the stars;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither, I cared not, so I never might</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold my doom of infamy fulfilled.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in my wanderings I reached the place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where, as thy story runs, the king was slain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then, lady⁠—thou shalt hear the very truth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I drew near the triple-branching roads,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A herald met me and a man who sat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a car drawn by colts⁠—as in thy tale⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The man in front and the old man himself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Threatened to thrust me rudely from the path,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then jostled by the charioteer in wrath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I struck him, and the old man, seeing this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Watched till I passed and from his car brought down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full on my head the double-pointed goad.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Yet was I quits with him and more; one stroke</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of my good staff sufficed to fling him clean</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the chariot seat and laid him prone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so I slew them every one. But if</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Betwixt this stranger there was aught in common</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Laius, who more miserable than I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What mortal could you find more god-abhorred?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wretch whom no sojourner, no citizen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May harbour or address, whom all are bound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To harry from their homes. And this same curse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was laid on me, and laid by none but me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea with these hands all gory I pollute</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bed of him I slew. Say, am I vile?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I not utterly unclean, a wretch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Doomed to be banished, and in banishment</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgo the sight of all my dearest ones,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And never tread again my native earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or else to wed my mother and slay my sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Polybus, who begat me and upreared?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If one should say, this is the handiwork</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of some inhuman power, who could blame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His judgment? But, ye pure and awful gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forbid, forbid that I should see that day!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May I be blotted out from living men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere such a plague spot set on me its brand!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>We too, O king, are troubled; but till thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast questioned the survivor, still hope on.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My hope is faint, but still enough survives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bid me bide the coming of this herd.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Suppose him here, what wouldst thou learn of him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ll tell thee, lady; if his tale agrees</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With thine, I shall have ’scaped calamity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what of special import did I say?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In thy report of what the herdsman said</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laius was slain by robbers; now if he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still speaks of robbers, not a robber, I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slew him not; “one” with “many” cannot square.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if he says one lonely wayfarer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The last link wanting to my guilt is forged.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, rest assured, his tale ran thus at first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor can he now retract what then he said;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not I alone but all our townsfolk heard it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en should he vary somewhat in his story,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He cannot make the death of Laius</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In any wise jump with the oracle.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Loxias said expressly he was doomed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To die by my child’s hand, but he, poor babe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He shed no blood, but perished first himself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So much for divination. Henceforth I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will look for signs neither to right nor left.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou reasonest well. Still I would have thee send</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fetch the bondsman hither. See to it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That will I straightway. Come, let us within.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would do nothing that my lord mislikes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>My lot be still to lead</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The life of innocence and fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Irreverence in word or deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To follow still those laws ordained on high</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose birthplace is the bright ethereal sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">No mortal birth they own,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Olympus their progenitor alone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne’er shall they slumber in oblivion cold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The god in them is strong and grows not old.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Of insolence is bred</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tyrant; insolence full blown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">With empty riches surfeited,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scales the precipitous height and grasps the throne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Then topples o’er and lies in ruin prone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">No foothold on that dizzy steep.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But O may Heaven the true patriot keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who burns with emulous zeal to serve the State.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God is my help and hope, on him I wait.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>But the proud sinner, or in word or deed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">That will not Justice heed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Nor reverence the shrine</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Of images divine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perdition seize his vain imaginings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">If, urged by greed profane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">He grasps at ill-got gain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lays an impious hand on holiest things.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Who when such deeds are done</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Can hope heaven’s bolts to shun?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If sin like this to honor can aspire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dance I still and lead the sacred choir?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>No more I’ll seek earth’s central oracle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Or Abae’s hallowed cell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Nor to Olympia bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">My votive offering.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If before all God’s truth be not bade plain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">O Zeus, reveal thy might,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">King, if thou’rt named aright</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Omnipotent, all-seeing, as of old;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">For Laius is forgot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">His weird, men heed it not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Apollo is forsook and faith grows cold.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My lords, ye look amazed to see your queen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With wreaths and gifts of incense in her hands.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had a mind to visit the high shrines,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Oedipus is overwrought, alarmed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With terrors manifold. He will not use</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His past experience, like a man of sense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To judge the present need, but lends an ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To any croaker if he augurs ill.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since then my counsels naught avail, I turn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee, our present help in time of trouble,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Apollo, Lord Lycean, and to thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My prayers and supplications here I bring.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lighten us, lord, and cleanse us from this curse!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For now we all are cowed like mariners</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who see their helmsman dumbstruck in the storm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Corinthian Messenger</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My masters, tell me where the palace is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Oedipus; or better, where’s the king.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Here is the palace and he bides within;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is his queen the mother of his children.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All happiness attend her and the house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blessed is her husband and her marriage-bed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My greetings to thee, stranger; thy fair words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deserve a like response. But tell me why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou comest⁠—what thy need or what thy news.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good for thy consort and the royal house.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What may it be? Whose messenger art thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From Corinth I. The message wherewithal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I stand entrusted thou shalt hear anon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twill please thee surely, yet perchance offend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Declare it and explain this double sense.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Isthmian commons have resolved to make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy husband king⁠—so ’twas reported there.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What! is not aged Polybus still king?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, verily; he’s dead and in his grave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What! is he dead, the sire of Oedipus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If I speak falsely, may I die myself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Quick, maiden, bear these tidings to my lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye god-sent oracles, where stand ye now!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is the man whom Oedipus long shunned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In dread to prove his murderer; and now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He dies in nature’s course, not by his hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My wife, my queen, Jocasta, why hast thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Summoned me from my palace?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear this man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as thou hearest judge what has become</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all those awe-inspiring oracles.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is this man, and what his news for me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He comes from Corinth and his message this:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy father Polybus hath passed away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What? let me have it, stranger, from thy mouth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If I must first make plain beyond a doubt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My message, know that Polybus is dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By treachery, or by sickness visited?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One touch will send an old man to his rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So of some malady he died, poor man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, having measured the full span of years.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Out on it, lady! why should one regard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Pythian hearth or birds that scream i’ the air?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did they not point at me as doomed to slay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father? but he’s dead and in his grave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And here am I who ne’er unsheathed a sword;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless the longing for his absent son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Killed him and so <em>I</em> slew him in a sense.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, as they stand, the oracles are dead⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dust, ashes, nothing, dead as Polybus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, did not I foretell this long ago?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou didst: but I was misled by my fear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then let it no more weigh upon thy soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Must I not fear my mother’s marriage bed?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why should a mortal man, the sport of chance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With no assured foreknowledge, be afraid?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Best live a careless life from hand to mouth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This wedlock with thy mother fear not thou.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How oft it chances that in dreams a man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has wed his mother! He who least regards</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such brainsick phantasies lives most at ease.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I should have shared in full thy confidence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were not my mother living; since she lives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though half convinced I still must live in dread.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet thy sire’s death lights out darkness much.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Much, but my fear is touching her who lives.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who may this woman be whom thus you fear?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Merope, stranger, wife of Polybus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what of her can cause you any fear?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A heaven-sent oracle of dread import.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A mystery, or may a stranger hear it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, ’tis no secret. Loxias once foretold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I should mate with mine own mother, and shed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With my own hands the blood of my own sire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hence Corinth was for many a year to me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A home distant; and I trove abroad,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But missed the sweetest sight, my parents’ face.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Was this the fear that exiled thee from home?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, and the dread of slaying my own sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, since I came to give thee pleasure, King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I not rid thee of this second fear?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, thou shalt have due guerdon for thy pains.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, I confess what chiefly made me come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was hope to profit by thy coming home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I will ne’er go near my parents more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My son, ’tis plain, thou know’st not what thou doest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How so, old man? For heaven’s sake tell me all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If this is why thou dreadest to return.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, lest the god’s word be fulfilled in me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lest through thy parents thou shouldst be accursed?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This and none other is my constant dread.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost thou not know thy fears are baseless all?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How baseless, if I am their very son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since Polybus was naught to thee in blood.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say’st thou? was not Polybus my sire?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As much thy sire as I am, and no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My sire no more to me than one who is naught!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since I begat thee not, no more did he.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What reason had he then to call me son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Know that he took thee from my hands, a gift.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet, if no child of his, he loved me well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A childless man till then, he warmed to thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A foundling or a purchased slave, this child?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I found thee in Cithaeron’s wooded glens.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What led thee to explore those upland glades?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My business was to tend the mountain flocks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A vagrant shepherd journeying for hire?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True, but thy saviour in that hour, my son.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My saviour? from what harm? what ailed me then?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Those ankle joints are evidence enow.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah, why remind me of that ancient sore?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I loosed the pin that riveted thy feet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, from my cradle that dread brand I bore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whence thou deriv’st the name that still is thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who did it? I adjure thee, tell me who</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say, was it father, mother?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The man from whom I had thee may know more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, did another find me, not thyself?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not I; another shepherd gave thee me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who was he? Would’st thou know again the man?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He passed indeed for one of Laius’ house.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The king who ruled the country long ago?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The same: he was a herdsman of the king.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And is he living still for me to see him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>His fellow-countrymen should best know that.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Doth any bystander among you know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The herd he speaks of, or by seeing him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Afield or in the city? answer straight!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hour hath come to clear this business up.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Methinks he means none other than the hind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom thou anon wert fain to see; but that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our queen Jocasta best of all could tell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Madam, dost know the man we sent to fetch?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is the same of whom the stranger speaks?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is the man? What matter? Let it be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twere waste of thought to weigh such idle words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, with such guiding clues I cannot fail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bring to light the secret of my birth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh, as thou carest for thy life, give o’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This quest. Enough the anguish <em>I</em> endure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be of good cheer; though I be proved the son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of a bondwoman, aye, through three descents</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triply a slave, thy honor is unsmirched.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet humour me, I pray thee; do not this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot; I must probe this matter home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis for thy sake I advise thee for the best.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I grow impatient of this best advice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah mayst thou ne’er discover who thou art!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, fetch me here the herd, and leave yon woman</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To glory in her pride of ancestry.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O woe is thee, poor wretch! With that last word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I leave thee, henceforth silent evermore. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jocasta</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, Oedipus, why stung with passionate grief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath the queen thus departed? Much I fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From this dead calm will burst a storm of woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let the storm burst, my fixed resolve still holds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To learn my lineage, be it ne’er so low.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may be she with all a woman’s pride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thinks scorn of my base parentage. But I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who rank myself as Fortune’s favorite child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The giver of good gifts, shall not be shamed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She is my mother and the changing moons</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My brethren, and with them I wax and wane.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus sprung why should I fear to trace my birth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing can make me other than I am.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>If my soul prophetic err not, if my wisdom aught avail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thee, Cithaeron, I shall hail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the nurse and foster-mother of our Oedipus shall greet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere tomorrow’s full moon rises, and exalt thee as is meet.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dance and song shall hymn thy praises, lover of our royal race.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Phoebus, may my words find grace!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Child, who bare thee, nymph or goddess? sure thy sure was more than man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Haply the hill-roamer Pan.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of did Loxias beget thee, for he haunts the upland wold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or Cyllene’s lord, or Bacchus, dweller on the hilltops cold?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did some Heliconian Oread give him thee, a new-born joy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Nymphs with whom he love to toy?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Elders, if I, who never yet before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have met the man, may make a guess, methinks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I see the herdsman who we long have sought;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His time-worn aspect matches with the years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of yonder agèd messenger; besides</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I seem to recognise the men who bring him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As servants of my own. But you, perchance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Having in past days known or seen the herd,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May better by sure knowledge my surmise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I recognise him; one of Laius’ house;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A simple hind, but true as any man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Corinthian, stranger, I address thee first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is this the man thou meanest!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This is he.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And now old man, look up and answer all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I ask thee. Wast thou once of Laius’ house?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I was, a thrall, not purchased but home-bred.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What was thy business? how wast thou employed?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The best part of my life I tended sheep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What were the pastures thou didst most frequent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Cithaeron and the neighbouring alps.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou must have known yon man, at least by fame?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yon man? in what way? what man dost thou mean?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The man here, having met him in past times⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Off-hand I cannot call him well to mind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No wonder, master. But I will revive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His blunted memories. Sure he can recall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What time together both we drove our flocks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He two, I one, on the Cithaeron range,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For three long summers; I his mate from spring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till rose Arcturus; then in winter time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I led mine home, he his to Laius’ folds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did these things happen as I say, or no?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis long ago, but all thou say’st is true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, thou mast then remember giving me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A child to rear as my own foster-son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why dost thou ask this question? What of that?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Friend, he that stands before thee was that child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A plague upon thee! Hold thy wanton tongue!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Softly, old man, rebuke him not; thy words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are more deserving chastisement than his.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O best of masters, what is my offence?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not answering what he asks about the child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He speaks at random, babbles like a fool.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou lack’st grace to speak, I’ll loose thy tongue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For mercy’s sake abuse not an old man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Arrest the villain, seize and pinion him!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alack, alack!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What have I done? what wouldst thou further learn?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Didst give this man the child of whom he asks?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I did; and would that I had died that day!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And die thou shalt unless thou tell the truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But, if I tell it, I am doubly lost.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The knave methinks will still prevaricate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I confessed I gave it long ago.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whence came it? was it thine, or given to thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I had it from another, ’twas not mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From whom of these our townsmen, and what house?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forbear for God’s sake, master, ask no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If I must question thee again, thou’rt lost.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well then⁠—it was a child of Laius’ house.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Slave-born or one of Laius’ own race?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I stand upon the perilous edge of speech.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I of hearing, but I still must hear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Know then the child was by repute his own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But she within, thy consort best could tell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What! she, she gave it thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis so, my king.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With what intent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To make away with it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, she its mother?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fearing a dread weird.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What weird?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas told that he should slay his sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What didst thou give it then to this old man?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herdsman</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Through pity, master, for the babe. I thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He’d take it to the country whence he came;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But he preserved it for the worst of woes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For if thou art in sooth what this man saith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God pity thee! thou wast to misery born.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! ah me! all brought to pass, all true!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O light, may I behold thee nevermore!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I stand a wretch, in birth, in wedlock cursed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A parricide, incestuously, triply cursed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i4">Races of mortal man</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Whose life is but a span,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I count ye but the shadow of a shade!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">For he who most doth know</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Of bliss, hath but the show;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A moment, and the visions pale and fade.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy fall, O Oedipus, thy piteous fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Warns me none born of women blest to call.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i4">For he of marksmen best,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">O Zeus, outshot the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And won the prize supreme of wealth and power.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">By him the vulture maid</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Was quelled, her witchery laid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He rose our saviour and the land’s strong tower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We hailed thee king and from that day adored</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of mighty Thebes the universal lord.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i4">O heavy hand of fate!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Who now more desolate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose tale more sad than thine, whose lot more dire?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">O Oedipus, discrownèd head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thy cradle was thy marriage bed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One harbourage sufficed for son and sire.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How could the soil thy father eared so long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Endure to bear in silence such a wrong?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i4">All-seeing Time hath caught</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Guilt, and to justice brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The son and sire commingled in one bed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">O child of Laius’ ill-starred race</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Would I had ne’er beheld thy face!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I raise for thee a dirge as o’er the dead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, sooth to say, through thee I drew new breath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now through thee I feel a second death.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Most grave and reverend senators of Thebes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What deeds ye soon must hear, what sights behold!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How will ye mourn, if, true-born patriots,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye reverence still the race of Labdacus!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not Ister nor all Phasis’ flood, I ween,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could wash away the blood-stains from this house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ills it shrouds or soon will bring to light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ills wrought of malice, not unwittingly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worst to bear are self-inflicted wounds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Grievous enough for all our tears and groans</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our past calamities; what canst thou add?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My tale is quickly told and quickly heard.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our sovereign lady queen Jocasta’s dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, poor queen! how came she by her death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By her own hand. And all the horror of it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not having seen, yet cannot apprehend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nathless, as far as my poor memory serves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will relate the unhappy lady’s woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When in her frenzy she had passed inside</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The vestibule, she hurried straight to win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bridal-chamber, clutching at her hair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With both her hands, and, once within the room,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She shut the doors behind her with a crash.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Laius,” she cried, and called her husband dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long, long ago; her thought was of that child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By him begot, the son by whom the sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was murdered and the mother left to breed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With her own seed, a monstrous progeny.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then she bewailed the marriage bed whereon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Poor wretch, she had conceived a double brood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Husband by husband, children by her child.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What happened after that I cannot tell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor how the end befell, for with a shriek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Burst on us Oedipus; all eyes were fixed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On Oedipus, as up and down he strode,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor could we mark her agony to the end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For stalking to and fro “A sword!” he cried,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Where is the wife, no wife, the teeming womb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That bore a double harvest, me and mine?”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in his frenzy some supernal power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(No mortal, surely, none of us who watched him)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Guided his footsteps; with a terrible shriek,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though one beckoned him, he crashed against</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The folding doors, and from their staples forced</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wrenchèd bolts and hurled himself within.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then we beheld the woman hanging there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A running noose entwined about her neck.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when he saw her, with a maddened roar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He loosed the cord; and when her wretched corpse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lay stretched on earth, what followed⁠—O ’twas dread!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He tore the golden brooches that upheld</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her queenly robes, upraised them high and smote</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full on his eye-balls, uttering words like these:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“No more shall ye behold such sights of woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deeds I have suffered and myself have wrought;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Henceforward quenched in darkness shall ye see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those ye should ne’er have seen; now blind to those</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom, when I saw, I vainly yearned to know.”</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Such was the burden of his moan, whereto,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not once but oft, he struck with his hand uplift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His eyes, and at each stroke the ensanguined orbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bedewed his beard, not oozing drop by drop,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But one black gory downpour, thick as hail.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such evils, issuing from the double source,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have whelmed them both, confounding man and wife.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till now the storied fortune of this house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was fortunate indeed; but from this day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe, lamentation, ruin, death, disgrace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All ills that can be named, all, all are theirs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But hath he still no respite from his pain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He cries, “Unbar the doors and let all Thebes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold the slayer of his sire, his mother’s⁠—”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shameful word my lips may not repeat.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He vows to fly self-banished from the land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor stay to bring upon his house the curse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Himself had uttered; but he has no strength</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor one to guide him, and his torture’s more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than man can suffer, as yourselves will see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For lo, the palace portals are unbarred,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And soon ye shall behold a sight so sad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he who must abhorred would pity it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</b> blinded.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Woeful sight! more woeful none</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">These sad eyes have looked upon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Whence this madness? None can tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Who did cast on thee his spell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Prowling all thy life around,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Leaping with a demon bound.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Hapless wretch! how can I brook</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">On thy misery to look?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Though to gaze on thee I yearn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Much to question, much to learn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Horror-struck away I turn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! ah woe is me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah whither am I borne!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How like a ghost forlorn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My voice flits from me on the air!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On, on the demon goads. The end, ah where?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>An end too dread to tell, too dark to see.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Dark, dark! The horror of darkness, like a shroud,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wraps me and bears me on through mist and cloud.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah me, ah me! What spasms athwart me shoot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What pangs of agonising memory?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>No marvel if in such a plight thou feel’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The double weight of past and present woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Ah friend, still loyal, constant still and kind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Thou carest for the blind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know thee near, and though bereft of eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Thy voice I recognise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>O doer of dread deeds, how couldst thou mar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy vision thus? What demon goaded thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Apollo, friend, Apollo, he it was</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">That brought these ills to pass;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the right hand that dealt the blow</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Was mine, none other. How,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How, could I longer see when sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Brought no delight?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! ’tis as thou sayest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Say, friends, can any look or voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or touch of love henceforth my heart rejoice?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Haste, friends, no fond delay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Take the twice cursed away</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Far from all ken,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The man abhorred of gods, accursed of men.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>O thy despair well suits thy desperate case.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I had never looked upon thy face!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>My curse on him whoe’er unrived</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The waif’s fell fetters and my life revived!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He meant me well, yet had he left me there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He had saved my friends and me a world of care.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I too had wished it so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Then had I never come to shed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father’s blood nor climbed my mother’s bed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The monstrous offspring of a womb defiled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Co-mate of him who gendered me, and child.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was ever man before afflicted thus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Oedipus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot say that thou hast counseled well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thou wert better dead than living blind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What’s done was well done. Thou canst never shake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My firm belief. A truce to argument.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, had I sight, I know not with what eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I could have met my father in the shades,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or my poor mother, since against the twain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sinned, a sin no gallows could atone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye, but, ye say, the sight of children joys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A parent’s eyes. What, born as mine were born?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, such a sight could never bring me joy;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor this fair city with its battlements,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its temples and the statues of its gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sights from which I, now wretchedst of all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once ranked the foremost Theban in all Thebes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By my own sentence am cut off, condemned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By my own proclamation ’gainst the wretch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The miscreant by heaven itself declared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unclean⁠—and of the race of Laius.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus branded as a felon by myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How had I dared to look you in the face?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, had I known a way to choke the springs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hearing, I had never shrunk to make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dungeon of this miserable frame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cut off from sight and hearing; for ’tis bliss</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bide in regions sorrow cannot reach.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why didst thou harbour me, Cithaeron, why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Didst thou not take and slay me? Then I never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had shown to men the secret of my birth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Polybus, O Corinth, O my home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Home of my ancestors (so wast thou called)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How fair a nursling then I seemed, how foul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The canker that lay festering in the bud!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now is the blight revealed of root and fruit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye triple high-roads, and thou hidden glen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Coppice, and pass where meet the three-branched ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye drank my blood, the life-blood these hands spilt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father’s; do ye call to mind perchance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those deeds of mine ye witnessed and the work</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wrought thereafter when I came to Thebes?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O fatal wedlock, thou didst give me birth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, having borne me, sowed again my seed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mingling the blood of fathers, brothers, children,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brides, wives and mothers, an incestuous brood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All horrors that are wrought beneath the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Horrors so foul to name them were unmeet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O, I adjure you, hide me anywhere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far from this land, or slay me straight, or cast me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down to the depths of ocean out of sight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come hither, deign to touch an abject wretch;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Draw near and fear not; I myself must bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The load of guilt that none but I can share.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo, here is Creon, the one man to grant</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy prayer by action or advice, for he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is left the State’s sole guardian in thy stead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! what words to accost him can I find?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What cause has he to trust me? In the past</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have bee proved his rancorous enemy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not in derision, Oedipus, I come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor to upbraid thee with thy past misdeeds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To Bystanders.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But shame upon you! if ye feel no sense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of human decencies, at least revere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Sun whose light beholds and nurtures all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave not thus nakedly for all to gaze at</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A horror neither earth nor rain from heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor light will suffer. Lead him straight within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For it is seemly that a kinsman’s woes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be heard by kin and seen by kin alone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O listen, since thy presence comes to me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A shock of glad surprise⁠—so noble thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I so vile⁠—O grant me one small boon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I ask it not on my behalf, but thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what the favor thou wouldst crave of me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forth from thy borders thrust me with all speed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Set me within some vasty desert where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No mortal voice shall greet me any more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This had I done already, but I deemed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It first behoved me to consult the god.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>His will was set forth fully⁠—to destroy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The parricide, the scoundrel; and I am he.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, so he spake, but in our present plight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twere better to consult the god anew.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dare ye inquire concerning such a wretch?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, for thyself wouldst credit now his word.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, and on thee in all humility</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I lay this charge: let her who lies within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Receive such burial as thou shalt ordain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such rites ’tis thine, as brother, to perform.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for myself, O never let my Thebes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The city of my sires, be doomed to bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The burden of my presence while I live.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, let me be a dweller on the hills,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On yonder mount Cithaeron, famed as mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My tomb predestined for me by my sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mother, while they lived, that I may die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slain as they sought to slay me, when alive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This much I know full surely, nor disease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall end my days, nor any common chance;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I had ne’er been snatched from death, unless</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I was predestined to some awful doom.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>So be it. I reck not how Fate deals with me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But my unhappy children⁠—for my sons</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be not concerned, O Creon, they are men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for themselves, where’er they be, can fend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for my daughters twain, poor innocent maids,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who ever sat beside me at the board</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sharing my viands, drinking of my cup,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For them, I pray thee, care, and, if thou willst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O might I feel their touch and make my moan.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear me, O prince, my noble-hearted prince!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could I but blindly touch them with my hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’d think they still were mine, as when I saw.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What say I? can it be my pretty ones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose sobs I hear? Has Creon pitied me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sent me my two darlings? Can this be?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis true; ’twas I procured thee this delight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Knowing the joy they were to thee of old.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God speed thee! and as meed for bringing them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May Providence deal with thee kindlier</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than it has dealt with me! O children mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where are ye? Let me clasp you with these hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A brother’s hands, a father’s; hands that made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lack-luster sockets of his once bright eyes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hands of a man who blindly, recklessly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Became your sire by her from whom he sprang.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though I cannot behold you, I must weep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In thinking of the evil days to come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The slights and wrongs that men will put upon you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where’er ye go to feast or festival,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No merrymaking will it prove for you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But oft abashed in tears ye will return.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when ye come to marriageable years,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where’s the bold wooers who will jeopardise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To take unto himself such disrepute</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As to my children’s children still must cling,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what of infamy is lacking here?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Their father slew his father, sowed the seed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where he himself was gendered, and begat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These maidens at the source wherefrom he sprang.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such are the gibes that men will cast at you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who then will wed you? None, I ween, but ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must pine, poor maids, in single barrenness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Prince, Menoeceus’ son, to thee, I turn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the it rests to father them, for we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their natural parents, both of us, are lost.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O leave them not to wander poor, unwed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy kin, nor let them share my low estate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O pity them so young, and but for thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All destitute. Thy hand upon it, Prince.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To you, my children I had much to say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were ye but ripe to hear. Let this suffice:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pray ye may find some home and live content,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And may your lot prove happier than your sire’s.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hast had enough of weeping; pass within.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I must obey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though ’tis grievous.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Weep not, everything must have its day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Well I go, but on conditions.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>What thy terms for going, say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Send me from the land an exile.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ask this of the gods, not me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>But I am the gods’ abhorrence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Then they soon will grant thy plea.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>So thou yieldest to my pleading?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>When I speak I mean it so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Lead me hence, then, I am willing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Come, but let thy children go.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oedipus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Rob me not of these my children!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Crave not mastery in all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the mastery that raised thee was thy bane and wrought thy fall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Look ye, countrymen and Thebans, this is Oedipus the great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He who knew the Sphinx’s riddle and was mightiest in our state.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who of all our townsmen gazed not on his fame with envious eyes?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, in what a sea of troubles sunk and overwhelmed he lies!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore wait to see life’s ending ere thou count one mortal blest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wait till free from pain and sorrow he has gained his final rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
